HOW TO WRITE A COVER LETTER
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
A cover letter is about identifying the match you see between your skills and quali!cations and the employer’s needs. Simply repeating your CV in sentence form is a missed opportunity; instead your cover letter
should focus on the key reasons you are a good candidate for this particular position. Your CV is an outline,
your cover letter should bring it to life! Before you sit down to write, ask yourself:

1. what you would like the employer to know about you, 
2. why you want the job, 
3. and why you think they should hire you.

There are multiple ways to set out information in a cover letter. In general, your introductory paragraph
should give some context for your application (who are you and why you are writing) as well as providing a
glimpse into your motivation. If someone referred you to the posting or the organization, you may mention
their name. It can be helpful to end your !rst paragraph with a clear and speci!c "thesis" 
which explains exactly what you bring to the role. 
In the body of your letter you then back up your assertions with additional
details and examples which draw connections between your background and 
the skills/experience the employer is seeking. 
Conclude your letter with a little more information about your motivation to work for this
company/industry, and thank the reader for their time and consideration.

NOTE:
1. Keep your letter concise and limited to one page. This likely means you cannot talk about everything,
so don't try. Rather, your job is to synthesize the information, focusing on the key elements of your
application.
2. It is always preferable to address your letter to a speci!c individual. Contact the receptionist or HR
department to see if they can provide you with the name of the appropriate person. If need be, you
may start your letter using a salutation such as "Dear Hiring Committee".
3. Avoid writing one generic cover letter for use in all your applications. Employers can tell. As much as
possible, your letter needs to be TAILORED to each position/employer/industry.
4. Research the industry, employer and position for which you are applying. Your cover letter should
demonstrate that you know something about the organization and articulate why you are good candidate.
5. PROOFREAD your letter extremely carefully. To detect errors more easily, try reading the letter from
bottom to top, or read it out loud. Ask friends, family or classmates to review it.
6. Aim for a con!dent, factual tone. Highlight your achievements/experience, but don't embellish.
7. It's okay to sound excited about the opportunity! Keen is good.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cover Letter Template: Harvard University
Note that in an email message, you would omit both your and the addressee's contact information, as well
as the date. Simply start with the salutation.

Your Name
(Pronouns)
Street Address
City, State Zip Code
Month Day, Year
Contact Name
Title (if known)
Organization Name
Street Address
City, State Zip Code
Dear (Name/Title): 

Dear (Name/Title):

Opening paragraph: Clearly state why you are writing. If applying for a job, indicate the position title
and where you saw it advertised. If you were referred to the position from someone within the
organization, or by someone the addressee knows, mention that as well. You may want to add a sentence
on why you feel you are a good fit for the position.

Middle paragraph(s): You should have one or two paragraphs that elaborate on how you have
developed the relevant skills required for the job, and any relevant experiences or education you have
acquired. Providing an example can help you emphasize your point. Of equal importance is your
argument for how your interest in both the job and the organization developed. You will want to ensure
that you include your interest and why it would be a logical decision to hire you.

Closing paragraph: Express interest in speaking with the addressee further in a personal interview, and
indicate that you will follow up within an appropriate time frame. Thank them for their time and
consideration of your application.

Sincerely,
Name
(Pronouns)
(typed)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
